# Healthcare Fraud Detection

## I. Introduction

The US Healthcare System has become a major expenditure in recent years and accounts for around 15% of the GDP. Both the size of the system and the humongous amount of money makes it an attractive target for fraud. Provider Fraud is one of the major problems in the US Healthcare System, and it leads to huge financial losses and also impacts the quality of healthcare facilities. The Payers or Insurance Agencies like Medicare, Medicaid and other agencies have to spend more money and in order to incur the financial losses, they have to decide to increase the insurance premium amount. Eventually, the healthcare system is becoming more and more expensive. Not only is the financial loss a major concern, fraud also severely hinders the quality of healthcare being provided to the legitimate patients. There are ways of detecting fraud manually but it requires intensive medical research and is also too time consuming. Hence, effective fraud detection using sophisticated machine learning techniques along with aided medical domain expertise is very important for improving the quality and reducing the cost of healthcare services.

## II. Business Problem

Fraud, Waste and Abuse have become one of the biggest concerns in the healthcare system of the United States, and can be caused by different healthcare entities viz, Patients (Insurance Subscriber/Beneficiary), Healthcare Providers (Hospitals, Physicians, Laboratories, Pharmacies, etc) and Payers (Insurance Providers like Medicare, Medicaid and other agencies). Frauds can be caused by either the single entities or by a conspiracy of multiple entities. In this case study, we primarily focus on the frauds caused by the Providers. Many healthcare systems rely on domain experts to manually review insurance claims and detect the potential frauds. There are hundreds of thousands to millions of claims data getting generated over time. Manual review of the claims is very time consuming and challenging. To reduce such effort, various machine learning techniques can be
leveraged to automate the manual processing of the claims and identify the potential frauds. Such a system would certainly help in reducing the cost, manual effort, processing & review time and other challenges in the system. This case study aims to solve the problem of detecting potential frauds in a healthcare system and assist in making the healthcare system better.
